---
layout: page
title: History
permalink: /history/
---

# A History of Windham

By Stuart Strothman

Windham is a mixed gender team dancing the English traditional Cotswold/border
Morris style known as Lichfield in Brattleboro, Vermont since 2010.

In the fall of 2010, experienced Morris dancer, banjo maker and musician Will
Fielding floated the idea of a new, ‘kick ass’ Morris team that would re-create
the excitement and greatness of the Lichfield tradition, which he had known
well as a member of Marlboro Morris and Sword. Morris styles are named after
towns in England, and before a division within the Marlboro team led to changes
in personnel and traditions, the style of the team had been Lichfield, a
dramatic, aerial tradition with large “capers” (a leaping dance step–Lichfield
includes Lichfield, scissors, and castlering capers, in addition to large,
sideways leaping “galleys”). For over a decade, nostalgia for the Marlboro
men’s former tradition had led to discussions about forming a new group,
particularly between Will and Tony Barrand, the accomplished local Morris
dancer and singer who originated many of our regional events and teams,
including Marlboro Morris and Sword and the Marlboro Ale.

Will made this happen in the fall of 2010, with high standards. He began to
carefully hand pick local people, some chosen by experience and ability, some
simply because they were tall and athletic, and formed a group which held its
first official meeting at the Marlboro College dance studio on February 20, 2011.
That group included Tony (as advisor), Will, Michael Einermann, Josh
Engle, Alex Koumjian, Davey Leland, Louisa Pugh, Rafe Rosen, myself, Dave and
Daniel Sullivan (both had danced with the Marlboro Men), John Todd, and Matt
Wojcick. Four of these folks (Michael, Josh, Alex, and Davey) were new to
Morris dancing.   Over the next year the group met, generally at the Stone
Church, with Dave, Louisa, and sometimes Heather Taylor serving as musicians,
and Will as foreman. From the beginning, he wanted high quality dancing, and
began each session with muscular training and stretches, before beginning to
school us in the specifics of the Lichfield tradition, which was new to all of
us except Will and Daniel. The ethic Will put forward was summarized by Tony in
a 2003 interview with Jennifer Cutting: “I wanted it to be American dancing,
and if we were doing it, to be the best dancing it could be. Because that was
my interest, aesthetics, and I wanted that to be an investment that one had to
learn out of the nature of the tradition, not to [strictly] imitate, but to
draw on the tradition as a reservoir from which to learn. And one of the things
you had to learn was that the dancing had to have integrity…I had always also
realized, there’s a whole other level of fun: When you’re doing things really
well, you kick into a level of enjoyment and pleasure that you don’t get just
when you do it casually.” Will was able to craft a team which would impress
experienced dancers.

The first fall-spring practice season saw very few public performances, which
started in Putney–at the Pierce’s Hall contra dance on November 26, and the
grand opening of the Putney General Store on December 10, 2011. By this time,
the team name and kit had already taken shape; Will expressed his early ideas
in an email on November 21, 2010, including “the two [names] I like best:
Windham Flying Eights (like the flying aces or the flying burrito brothers),
[and the] Southern Vermont Sky Kings (sky king is from an early TV show). These
are both classy names that will suit us for years to come. Both project an
image of high flying dancing….also the kit possibilities are very cool. I'm
picturing light and dark blue vests over whites, with a glint of silver.  White
silk scarves for those cold early May mornings. Bomber jackets and leather
helmets with goggles de rigeur.” In early January 2011 he also shared images of
a related kit from a Northwest clog morris team he admired, Loafer’s Glory, and
our present kit–black pants and shoes, white shirt, blue tuxedo vest, and blue
and silver arm ribbons evolved. The team name was pared down to “Windham,” and
after many others referred to us as “Windham Morris,” there was a bit of humor
in the self-referent “Windham NWMJW (not Windham Morris, just Windham).”

It is perhaps notable that in the November email, Will had strong feelings
about a ‘team drink’ as well: “The preferred drink of the squad will of course
be the sidecar. Luminous, golden-straw color, the perfectly controlled
sweetness, the jazzy high notes of the citrus against the steady bass of the
brandy. This is a drink whose suavité is beyond question. It's so easy, in
fact, to be seduced by this clever old roué that a word of caution would not be
out of place here. These gents have a way of stealing up on you and -- bimmo!
Next thing you know it's 8:43 on Monday morning and you're sitting in the
backseat of a taxi idling in front of your place of employ. In your skivvies.1
1/2 oz cognac, 3/4 oz Cointreau, 3/4 oz lemon juice. Shake, pour into a
cocktail glass.” In the early years, Will and others often brought beer to
practice. Rafe Rosen was nominated as our first squire, and Josh Engle served
as first ‘bagman’ (treasurer).

Many Windham dancers were present at the 2011 Marlboro Ale, and some Lichfield
appeared in pickup dancing. Windham released some Chippendale-style business
cards and its first team photo, which included Arthur Davis and Will Quale, set
in an historic image of the Estey Organ factory in Brattleboro.

![Team photo](https://assets.windham.club/team-photos/2012.jpg)

First official Windham photo(shop), 2012. By Heather Taylor (?). Clockwise from
top left: Josh, Michael, Rafe, Will F, Stu, John, Will Q, Davey, Arthur, Dave,
Louisa.

But the grand debut of Windham came in the month of May 2012, with appearances
at the Marlboro May Day tour on the 5th, our first home tour (Will’s idea) on
Mother’s Day, the Marlboro Morris Ale on the Memorial Day weekend, and Jake
Tuesday on the 29th. The Monadnock area’s Jack in the Green invited “the Morris
Gods of Windham” to a tour on the 12th, saying  “it would be quite a feather in
our caps to score a dance date with the most anticipated new Morris side since
the Restoration.” Windham could not manage the necessary numbers for that gig.
We also danced at Josh and Louisa’s wedding on June 2.

Windham’s first Marlboro Ale came off as a grand event, with two very notable
Windham performances accompanying the general acclaim from participants
throughout the tours. First, after the first show dance, David Sullivan played
“Nutting Girl” while his experienced, muscular son Daniel performed the
Lichfield jig, astounding onlookers with the height and strength of his capers.

![Daniel and Dave Sullian](/assets/images/jump.png)

Daniel and Dave Sullivan at Marlboro, 2012. Photo by Lynn Arnold.

Second, at the Newfane mass dance, Will (who generally acted as our fool), invited Tony out mid-performance to the middle of our Castlering circle for a sit-down glass of champagne, serving to honor Tony’s general magnificence, and to represent the passing of the Lichfield tradition from Marlboro to Windham.

![Will and Tony](/assets/images/newfane.png)

Will and Tony (and Davey and Rafe) at Newfane, 2012. Photo by ?

Over the next years the team evolved, with some significant moments that bear
mention. For one, the 2013 Marlboro Morris Ale saw a rainy Windham performance
of Tony’s dance I-91 (the chorus happens in a long line, representing dotted
lines on our local highway) on Elliot Street, and an iconic photograph by
Daniel Friedman of Windham’s castlering caper became a popular image in Morris
social media sites. It has served for years as the cover photo of How Many
Morris Dancers Are on Facebook, with nearly seven thousand members
predominantly in England and America. On the post, Jan Elliot calls it “the
best Morris photo ever,” echoed by Thomas Melendez; “the greatest Morris dance
pic I have ever seen. Flying through the air in sync. Such exuberance is truly
amazing to watch.”

![Windham on Elliot Street](https://assets.windham.club/windham/windham jumps high.jpg)

Windham on Elliot Street, 2013. Photo by Daniel Friedman.

This reputation as a “kick ass” team has followed Windham through the years,
though our membership has changed significantly. One huge and influential
change was inspired by Will; also in 2013, he invited Erin Hathway Weaver to
join the team, making us the first (?) mixed Cotswold team (a traditional
regional English dance style involving sticks, hankies, and bellpads on the
shin) to perform at the Marlboro Ale, since followed by many other teams,
notably the Marlboro Morris M (formerly Men), now a fierce promoter of gender
inclusion and social awareness, as we also strive to be. At the time of this
writing, Windham has several queer dancers on the team.

Traditions developed, such as dancing for Tony and Margaret Dale Barrand at
their house, and block parties on Blakeslee Avenue and West Street. On one
occasion at the Barrands’ on Prospect Street, we temporarily blocked the road
with our dance Vandals of Hammerwich, leading a Domino’s delivery vehicle to
register a complaint with the police. Tony greatly enjoyed the squad car’s
visit, and neighbor Scott Ainslie took the lead in explaining that we meant no
harm, would be done shortly, and pointing out many neighbors enjoying the
performance. Since then we occasionally enjoy the appellation ‘Vandals of
Prospect Street.’

Holding to tradition, Windham has made an effort to perform all the historic
Lichfield dances and those invented by Marlboro, and has developed a few new
ones using the traditional figures. Will himself developed the four-person jig
“Max Headroom” while we practiced at Headroom Stages on Elliot Street. Of new
dances within old traditions, Tony had this to say: “You’d get four or five or
something, and so you’d try and make up some dances in order to have this… It’s
interesting, feeling like the dances for six you couldn’t do with a gap, so you
needed to make up some dances that went with that. I remember one time, we did
that… it would have been around 1984 that the Marlboro Men, we went to an ale
in Toronto. And the normal dances we did at that point were in a style from
Lichfield, in the Midlands in England, which needed eight people, and there
were six of us. So, in order to do a show dance for ourselves, we decided the
one person who could play was going to play, and we needed to make up a dance
for five… So we made up a Lichfield-style dance for five.” This jig was
entitled Charrington Toby, named for a defunct English beer, now serving as a
regular dance for Windham. Other new dances have evolved in our longtime dance
spaces at Cotton Mill and now the Winston Prouty Center; four- and six-person
versions of our dances came out of low numbers, and a few new dances for eight
were developed including Crossing the Moon, which debuted at the Marlboro Ale
in 2018. Considerable effort has gone into new dances through the intelligence
and perseverance of our current squire Gil Rosenberg, who has been with the
team since 2013, foreman Arthur, and our experienced musician Andy Davis. A
developing group of young musicians and dancers on South Main Street has
recently fed the team, building our numbers to where we have a fairly reliable
set of eight or more at practices, and sometimes as many as five musicians.

In the category of major life events for Windham, the death of Will Fielding on
October 21, 2014 from cancer was both a devastating blow, and a source of
ongoing inspiration to strive for excellence and integrity to honor his legacy.
More recently, in 2022 Tony and Margaret Dale Barrand passed on, and Tony’s
life work continues to serve as incentive to continue the Lichfield and other
Morris traditions in Brattleboro, Vermont, New England, and America.

Two interviews with Tony Barrand, in which he discusses some of this history:

[Remembering the Life and Work of Tony Barrand, 2003](https://blogs.loc.gov/folklife/2022/03/remembering-the-life-and-work-of-tony-barrand-the-2003-interview-part-3/)

[Interview of Tony Barrand by Stuart Strothman, 2013](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Va1nKbAqVom90HB3D7BFIbWGwbgkJrfs/edit?usp=sharing&ouid=114842830821357460511&rtpof=true&sd=true)
